





TELESCOPE AS THE MAIN INSTRUMENT OF ASTRONOMERS
Despite the fact that the invention of the "telescope" is attributed to the Dutch master Lippersgey, the first who sent the infamous tube with three times the magnification to the sky was Galileo Galilei. The very same word "telescope" in translation from ancient Greek means "far look".
The principle of operation of the telescope is similar to the operation of the eyeball, because our eye is a lens, as well as a telescope. However, the telescope lens is much larger, and since we do not see the object itself, but only the light reflected from it, the telescope is able to catch more rays, so that the image is much clearer when magnified. The simplest optical telescopes consist of convex lenses: the lens of the lens, which is not refracted by light rays, and the lens of the eyepiece, through which the refracted light rays pass and reach the eye. The telescope tube must be painted black from the inside. This is done so that there is no glare from bright objects.
The largest optical telescope is the Great Canary telescope, whose mirror has a diameter of 10.4 meters. This telescope is a real guide to the world of distant galaxies, because it is able to see objects in the sky, the luminosity of which is a billion times weaker than those that can be seen by the human eye.
Optical telescopes are not the only type of telescope. One of the main types of telescopes is a radio telescope. Like all telescopes, the radio telescope collects electromagnetic radiation, which differs only in the range of the spectrum. The antenna and radiometer, which measures the energy characteristics of radiation, receive signals from such a telescope. The size of radio telescopes is really huge, the largest radio telescope is located in China and has a diameter of 305 meters.
The existence of space telescopes is not a secret for many, but why send expensive telescopes into orbit if a few thousand kilometers away will not change much, compared with the huge distances to the stars? The fact is that although the earth's atmosphere passes optical and radio emissions, electromagnetic waves with a shorter wavelength are almost impossible to study after they pass through the earth's atmosphere. Therefore, all observations in the ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma-ray ranges are possible only from space. The resolution of the Hubble telescope is an order of magnitude higher than that of earth's telescopes, because there is no distortion outside the atmosphere, so this telescope has helped detect millions of new space objects.
ADDRESSES OF THE STARS IN THE SKY
In order to give a star an address, you need to set the so-called origin of coordinates, and, since we live in three-dimensional space, each point (star) in the sky must have three coordinates.
The earth itself and the observer on It are considered to be the center from which the reference is made. Being in the center of an imaginary celestial sphere and mentally drawing through your eye a plane parallel to the plane of the earth's equator, we will get an important plane that will cross the celestial sphere in a large circle — the celestial equator.
If we draw a line parallel to The earth's axis of rotation through our eyes, we will get a plane that will cross the celestial sphere at points called the poles of the world. The Northern of these two poles is near a fairly bright star called the Polar one, and the axis connecting the poles of the world is called the axis of the world. Both on the globe and on the celestial sphere, the position of any point can be determined by two coordinates (the third coordinate we have already created in the form of a sphere): the latitude and longitude. But instead of latitude, astronomers use declination, which is also measured in degrees, and instead of longitude, they use right ascension. Most celestial bodies have constant coordinates for many millennia, but there are also "sky bums", such as comets and planets, whose coordinates change. The distances between the stars on the celestial sphere, as well as the distances between points on the ball, are expressed in degrees, but do not confuse the angular distances with the distances between the same stars in space, because in the sky two stars can be seen close to each other, and in space one of them can be many times farther than the other.
Despite the fact that the position of the star in the sky is taken as a constant value, catalogs with the coordinates of stars are rewritten by astrometrists. This is due to the very slow movement of the stars relative to the earth's observer, although the absolute speed of movement of stars in space reaches several hundred kilometers per second. The oldest star catalog is believed to have been compiled 6,000 years ago, and the first extant Hipparchus catalog, compiled around 136 BC, contained 850 stars visible to the naked eye.
The observation of stars is related to what the earth observer can observe, because our globe constantly closes a part of the celestial sphere from us. Spring, winter, summer and autumn skies are very different from each other. In the dark spring sky, for example, the milky Way is not visible, but with good binoculars, we can observe distant galaxies, and the summer, autumn and winter skies are filled with bright stars of the milky Way.
UNUSUAL PHENOMENA IN THE SKY
Since ancient times, people have tried to understand not only repeated, but also quite rare phenomena. For example, the ancient Egyptians believed that mirages are the ghosts of objects and places that once existed in reality, but have already disappeared.
Mirages as an inexplicable natural phenomenon have been a mystery for many millennia, but it is quite simple to explain this phenomenon. As you know, light travels rectilinearly only in a homogeneous medium, and at the border of two media, the light rays are refracted. Such an inhomogeneous medium is air, and due to the refraction of light in the atmosphere, imaginary images of individual objects may appear. Mirages often occur in deserts due to the fact that the open area has both heated, hot air and relatively cool. Rays of light that come from objects on the Ground, describe a kind of arc and return down, sometimes even hundreds of kilometers from the source. This refraction is often called the raising of the horizon, or the upper Mirage, and the legends of flying ships in the age of sailing vessels owe their origin to the Mirage.
The lower Mirage occurs only when the layers of air are so heated that the Sun's rays reflected from objects are very strongly curved. Lower mirages, transmitting inverted and very distant objects, can be observed even on hot asphalt. It is very rare to observe three-dimensional mirages when a person sees himself. This is due to the fact that there is a relatively large amount of water vapor in the air.
The rarest Mirage is considered a moving Fata Morgana — a complex optical phenomenon consisting of several forms of mirages, in which distant objects are seen repeatedly and with various distortions.
A rainbow is an amazing natural phenomenon that gives a person the opportunity to see the decomposition of white light into various components under natural conditions. The first theory of the rainbow was formulated in 1637 by the French philosopher and mathematician Rene Descartes. Sunlight passing through water droplets is repeatedly refracted and reflected, resulting in a bright colored arc. However, it is important to remember that the rainbow is actually a closed circle, and the size of the rainbow, the width of the bands, the appearance and brightness depend primarily on the number of water droplets in the air. It is very rare to see a rainbow that gives the Moon. This rainbow is quite pale, since the Moon itself shines with a faint reflected light, but even more rare is the triple or quarter rainbow, which in natural conditions is observed only a few times a century. Usually we see seven colors of the rainbow, although in reality the decomposition of the white color occurs in more than a million colors and shades that our eye can not distinguish due to its structure.
Crowns can be seen by looking at the moon, which shines through Cirrus clouds or transparent haze. Crowns are formed due to defecation of light on the smallest water droplets. The smaller the drops, the larger the diameter of the crowns, so since ancient times people knew that small crowns portend rain, and large ones — improving the weather. There are crowns around the Sun, but bright daylight makes them difficult to detect.
A halo is an atmospheric optical phenomenon that is a secondary circular glow around the Sun or moon. A halo occurs when the sky is covered with light, high, feathery clouds. Very small ice crystals and water droplets that make up the clouds disperse the sun's rays, thereby providing a beautiful glow.
Sometimes, in clear weather, at sunset or sunrise, you can see columns of light on both sides of the Sun, as if rising from the Ground. Individual sections of pillars are so bright that they form false suns. In the old days, this phenomenon was called the sun with ears.
THE STARS POINT THE WAY
For travelers for many millennia, the stars have been a very important landmark. A man who knew the sky could easily check the course of his ship with the constellations, but the North star was always the main compass. By facing it, we can easily determine the cardinal directions: North in front, South behind, West on the left, and East on the right. Astrogation has retained its importance even in modern aviation and navigation, because, despite the fact that aircraft and sea vessels are equipped with the latest radio navigation technology, there are situations when the devices fail or a storm plays out in The earth's magnetic field. Therefore, pilots, captains, and even cosmonauts must be able to determine their position and direction by the Sun, moon, and stars.
However, in addition to the North star in the sky of 6 thousand stars visible to the naked eye, only 26 are considered navigational.
One method for determining coordinates is to solve a navigation triangle called a PZX triangle. When the directions to the pole (P), to the Zenith (Z), and to any star (X) are known at one time, the search for the corresponding coordinates of a point on the globe gives the only correct answer. Without the lack of special equipment, this method may be the only one for determining its coordinates.
STARRY AND SUNNY DAYS
We use all kinds of watches every day, without noticing the many mysteries that time holds. We were taught from childhood that there are 24 hours in a day, and days are the period Of the earth's rotation around its axis. And it seems to be all true, but here is a discrepancy: in the day, not 24 hours, but 23 hours and 56 minutes! 4 minutes a day is 24 hours a year. The thing is that during the day, the star and solar revolutions of the Earth diverge by 4 minutes.
Starry night — this time a full gate of Earth in space, and solar day — the time gate of the planet relative to the center of the Sun, and as the Earth rotates not only around its axis but also orbits the Sun, these 4 minutes, equivalent to one degree on the sky, are the cause of this unusual discrepancy. We measure the movement of planets relative to distant fixed stars, but by measuring The earth's rotation relative to the moon, we would get a day equal to 24 hours and 49 minutes, which is definitely not an error, the fact is that the Moon also ran ahead in its orbit around the Earth, and catching up with the moon, the Earth will "turn" for another 53 minutes.
Despite the fact that a person lives days and nights, that is, solar days, in any Observatory there is a clock that goes by star time-every day for 4 minutes ahead. It is interesting that back in 1690, the Dane Ole Roemer mounted a telescope on an axis that was strengthened along the "West-East" line, so that the tube turned in the Meridian plane. Three centuries have passed, and the principle of the instrument has not changed.
EVERYTHING WE SEE IS THE PAST
Looking at the night sky, we see a lot of stars that are millions of kilometers away, and we admire their mysteries and mysteries. But in reality, we only see their past, what they were tens, hundreds and thousands of years ago. All astrophysicists study the past of stars, not knowing exactly what happens to them at the moment of observation. Light traveling in outer space has a speed of 300,000 km / s, which no one can exceed. Therefore, looking at the night sky, we see the Polar star that existed about 471 years ago, and the star Deneb, which is 72.5 thousand times brighter than the Sun, is visible only as it was 1596 years ago. Even sunlight reaches the Earth in a little more than 8 minutes, so we see both the Sun and the moon "late".
In reality, we see any object and any phenomenon with a certain delay, because our brain needs milliseconds to process the incoming information and realize what is happening, but since these time intervals are incredibly small, it seems to us that we are seeing it right now.
SOLAR ECLIPSE
A solar Eclipse is an amazing and mysterious astronomical phenomenon that involves the Moon eclipsing the Sun from an earth observer. In the Solar system, only the Earth can see a total Eclipse of the Sun. It is surprising, at least, that the only satellite of the Earth is 400 times smaller than the Sun and 400 times closer to it, because only the size and location of the moon make its disk equal to the sun's disk in the sky.
The Eclipse is observed only in a narrow band on the path of the shadow, because the width of the moon's shadow does not exceed 270 kilometers. But if the observer manages to get into the shadow area, he will see a total solar Eclipse, during which bright stars and planets will appear in the sky, and around the sun's hidden disk, the solar corona can be observed.
Due to the fact that the speed of movement of the moon's shadow is about 1 km/s, for a stationary earth observer, this spectacle will last only a few minutes. Observers who are less than two thousand kilometers from the moon's shadow can observe a partial solar Eclipse, in which the Moon hides only part of the Sun.
Another type of solar Eclipse is an annular Eclipse. This type of Eclipse can be observed when the Moon is at a significant distance from the Earth, and the visible lunar disk can not completely cover the Sun.
On average, 237 solar eclipses occur on Earth over 100 years, of which only 63 are total. Solar eclipses have helped scientists study the solar corona and chromosphere, and by comparing data from Chinese sources and modern observations, astronomers have determined that over three thousand years, the length of the day has increased by 0.047 seconds.

Nearest total solar eclipses:
1. December 14, 2020. Territory: the southern part of Chile and Argentina.
2. December 4, 2021. Territory: Antarctica.
3. April 8, 2024. Territory: Mexico, Eastern Canada, Central United States.
4. August 12, 2026. Territory: Arctic, Greenland, Iceland, Spain.
LUNAR ECLIPSE
Lunar eclipses occur when the Moon enters the area of the earth's shadow. The reason for lunar eclipses was first solved by Eastern priests, but, like all important astronomical knowledge, it was a great priestly secret. And only Greek scientists declassified the Egyptian wisdom and explained to everyone the nature of this phenomenon.
Lunar eclipses always occur during the full moon, when the Sun, Earth, and Moon line up in a row. If the Moon completely enters the cone of shadow cast by the Earth, a full phase of the lunar Eclipse occurs, lasting more than an hour and a half. It was lunar eclipses that prompted Aristotle to think about the spherical shape of the earth, because since the shadow cone has a circular cross-section, it means that the Earth has the shape of a ball. In order for a lunar Eclipse to occur, two independent conditions must coincide: there must be a full moon and the Moon must be at the node of its orbit. Nodes of the lunar orbit are the points where the moon's orbit intersects with the Ecliptic (a large circle of the celestial sphere, along which the sun's annual movement relative to the stars, visible from Earth, occurs). If the Moon does not completely enter the shadow cone, then this Eclipse is called a partial Eclipse. A lunar Eclipse can be observed on the entire hemisphere of the Earth, which is facing the moon at this moment.
During an Eclipse, the Moon does not disappear, but turns dark red. This is due to the fact that the sun's rays passing tangentially to the earth's surface are scattered in the Earth's atmosphere and partially reach the moon. The red-orange color of the moon during a total lunar Eclipse is due to the fact that the earth's atmosphere is most transparent to the rays of the red-orange part of the spectrum. The maximum number of eclipses per year is four, and the minimum is two. Lunar eclipses are cyclical and repeat in the same order every 18 years.


1) https://top10a.ru/samye-izvestnye-sozvezdiya.html#1 
2) http://www.russianspaceweb.com  
3) http://www.astronet.ru/
4) http://www.college.ru/astronomy/  
5) http://www.nasa.gov  
6) П.А.Бакулин, Э.В.Кононович, В.И.Мороз. Курс общей астрономии (4-е издание).7) Пантелеев В. Л. Физика Земли и планет. 4) Данлоп С. Азбука звездного неба. 5) Майлс Л., Смит А. Астрономия и космос. 6) Гусев И. Е., Астрономия. 8)Болсун А. И., Рапанович Е. Н. Словарь физических и астрономических терминов. 9) Кошевар Д. В. Вселенная и космос. )






