



The Sun
Main characteristics of the Sun:
1. Composition: 73% - hydrogen, 25% - helium, 2% - nitrogen, oxygen, silicon, iron, carbon, magnesium, calcium and sulfur.
2. Mass: 1.989×1030 kg. The mass of the Sun is 99.866% of the total mass of the entire Solar system. 
3. the Temperature in the center of the Sun reaches 16 million °C, and the temperature of the Solar corona is approximately equal to at 1-2 million °C.
4. Luminosity: 3,828×1026 W.
5. The speed of rotation around its axis (at the equator): 7284 km/h.
6. The average distance to the Earth 149.5 million km.
7. Speed in orbit around the center of the galaxy: 2.2×105 m/s.
8. Age: about 5 billion years. The sun is about halfway through its life cycle.
Our Sun is a huge ball of gas, and its source of energy is located in the Central part, thanks to which such a large temperature is maintained. The reason that the Sun has been shining for billions of years and does not go out is the energy that is released in huge quantities during thermonuclear reactions. This energy is released as a result of the fusion of light atoms into heavier ones: in the center of the Sun, a single atom of helium is formed from four hydrogen atoms. So, for example, 2-3 grams of hydrogen participating in the action can heat the Olympic pool to the boiling point. It is this energy of the atom that people have learned to release when creating a hydrogen bomb. 
There is much more helium in the center of the Sun than on the surface. But in about 5 billion years, there will be so little hydrogen in the core that it will "burn" in the layer around the core, which will lead to the rapid expansion of the Sun, which will turn into a red giant. And the atmosphere of such a huge star will go beyond the boundaries of The earth's orbit. But the life of the Sun will not end there — after undergoing many more different changes, it will become a white dwarf.
The solar atmosphere is also of great interest. The deepest layers of the atmosphere are called the photosphere, and since their thickness is no more than one thousandth of the solar radius, the photosphere is often called the solar surface. The temperature of this area varies from approximately 4000-8000° C. On the surface of the photosphere, special telescopes can observe small bright grains-granules that are separated by dark paths. Granulation is the result of mixing warm and cold gas streams. This type of heat exchange, in which internal energy is transmitted by jets and streams (convection), plays an important role in the overall structure of the atmosphere and is the cause of all the various manifestations of solar activity. Even with the naked eye, you can see dark spots in the Sun. They appear due to plasma ionization and are accompanied by the release of strong magnetic fields into the photosphere. In such places, the mixing and rise of hot gases from below is slowed down, and dark areas — sunspots — appear against the background of the bright photosphere.
The photosphere gradually passes into the chromosphere, which is a more rarefied layer of the atmosphere. The total length of the chromosphere is 10-15 thousand kilometers and has a red-purple color. It is visible during total solar eclipses.
Unlike the photosphere and chromosphere, the outermost part of the Sun's atmosphere — the corona — extends for millions of kilometers. The main feature of the crown is its radiant structure. Coronal rays can take all sorts of forms. Also, the solar corona changes both its shape and brightness every 11 years. This feature is associated with the movement of the zone where spots are formed. The main reason for such features of the corona is the high temperature of the discharged gas. At a temperature of over 1 million degrees, the speed of the free electron is equal to 4000 km / s, so even the huge force of gravity is not able to keep all the particles in the gravitational field. Near the Earth, the speed of the solar wind can reach 1000 km/s. It is the solar corona that influences many geophysical phenomena on Earth, even though our planet is protected from solar radiation by a magnetic field. But before sunlight can reach the earth's surface, x-rays and ultraviolet rays are absorbed at an altitude of 300-350 kilometers. And not absorbed part of the radiation comes to the Ground and is the cause of sunburn.
Solar flares are very powerful emissions of solar energy. For comparison, a few minutes of solar flare can produce as much heat as comes from the Sun on the entire surface of our planet for a whole year. Very fast particles cause strong currents in the earth's atmosphere. The most famous manifestation of the bombardment of the atmosphere by solar particles is the Aurora Borealis, which is usually red and green in color. This glow is due to the fact that the main components of the atmosphere — oxygen and nitrogen — are irradiated by energetic particles. Auroras allow you to track the solar cycles, because at the maximum of solar activity, almost every day you can see the lights, and at the minimum they can be absent for months. It is because of solar radiation that we can observe the greenhouse effect on Earth, because the radiation of the heated earth's surface is absorbed by water vapor and carbon dioxide, thanks to which the air shell retains heat.
We see the Sun white and yellow at the zenith and orange and red at sunset, but in reality our star is white. The reason for this distortion of light rays is the earth's atmosphere: the longer the sun's ray stays in the atmosphere, the more noticeable the change in its color.
MERCURY
Main characteristics of mercury:
1. Composition: 42% - oxygen, 29% — sodium, 22% - hydrogen, 7% - helium, potassium, water, nitrogen, carbon dioxide.
2. Diameter: 4878 km.
3. Weight: 3, 28H1023 kg.
4. Rotation Period around the Sun: 58.7 days.
5. The period of rotation around its axis: 88 days.
6. Gravitational acceleration: 3.7 m/CI (0,37 g).
7. The average distance from the Sun 57 909 227 km.

Mercury is the smallest and closest planet to the Sun. It is named after the ancient Roman mythological God mercury, the patron of trade. Mercury belongs to the planets of the earth group. Mercury, like the Moon, shines with reflected sunlight, and also changes phases: from a narrow sickle to a light circle. In its physical characteristics, mercury resembles the only satellite of the Earth, but mercury itself has no satellites. When in 1974 the Mariner 10 spacecraft flew close to mercury and transmitted images of its surfaces to Earth, then scientists saw the second Moon, because the surface of mercury is dotted with craters and spots, like on the moon, and the largest crater — the plain of Heat, has a diameter of about 1500 kilometers. The core of this planet is relatively large, making up about 83% of the total volume of the planet and mainly consists of iron. Mercury is a hot planet, because it is very close to the Sun, but since the rotation around its axis is quite slow, the reverse side has time to cool down, so the temperature on the surface ranges from -190 to +430° C. Mercury gets seven times more solar energy than the Earth, and from the surface of Mercury, the Sun looks three times larger than from the surface of the Earth. Since there is no change of seasons on Mercury, there are areas near the poles that the sun's rays do not illuminate, so scientists suggest that glaciers may exist under the dust layer in the poles.
Images of the surface of Mercury can help us determine how the planet evolved. At the beginning of its history, Mercury was subjected to a very strong warming, and then after several eras of active volcanism experienced intense bombardment, thanks to which numerous craters and pools appeared. Due to its relatively small mass and weak magnetic fields, Mercury is unable to maintain an atmosphere. Hydrogen and helium arrive on the planet with the solar wind, and then go back into space. Observing mercury is a rather difficult task, because the planet is always observed at dawn-morning or evening-against the background of the twilight sky, and in Northern latitudes, it is also very low above the horizon. The period of best visibility of mercury occurs only a few times a year, but even during these periods it is not easy to see it with the naked eye. Using special equipment, in 2008, astronomers from Boston University announced the discovery of mercury's comet-like tail with a length of more than 2.5 million kilometers.
Mercury is tidally connected to the Sun, and its orbital resonance is 3:2. In Simple words, relative to fixed stars, it rotates around its axis exactly three times for every two revolutions it makes around the Sun. The proximity of the Sun creates problems for the telescopic study of Mercury — for example, the famous Hubble telescope can not be used to observe this planet due to the fact that if you try to do this, the equipment will be permanently damaged. Despite all the difficulties of studying Mercury, in 2018 The European space Agency launched the BepiColombo mission. The vehicles will have to reach Mercury by 2025.
VENUSIAN
Main characteristics of Venus:
1. Composition: 96.5% - carbon dioxide, 3.5% - nitrogen.
2. Diameter: 12102 km (95% earth's).
3. Weight: 4, 87H1024 kg (81.5% of the earth).
4. Period of rotation around the Sun: 243 days.
5. The period of rotation around its axis: 224,7 days.
6. The acceleration of gravity: 8.87 m/CI (0.9 g).
7. Distance from Sun: 108 208 930 km.

Venus is the second most distant planet from the Sun and belongs to the earth group. The most beautiful of the stars of the sky was not accidentally named after the goddess of beauty and love. Despite the fact that Venus was discovered before our era, very little was known about this planet. The first observations of Venus using an optical telescope were made by Galileo Galilei in 1610, proving that it shines with the reflected light of the Sun. Of all the planets in the Solar system, only Venus rotates around the Sun clockwise, and all the other planets — counterclockwise.
The atmosphere of Venus is very dense even compared to Earth. This was proved in the XVIII century by M. V. Lomonosov. In 1761, the transit of Venus before The sun's disk was expected. When the black disk of Venus descended from the solar disk, Lomonosov noticed that a thin arc at the edge of the Sun curved, forming a bright ledge, this could only be caused by the refraction of solar rays in the atmosphere. This observation allowed Lomonosov to state that Venus has an atmosphere similar to earth's. Venus is always brighter than all the stars in the sky, except the Sun, so usually Venus is visible shortly before sunrise or some time after sunset and is traditionally called the morning star and evening star. Oddly enough, Venus faces the Earth with the same side, and scientists can not fully understand the reason for this phenomenon. Venus has no satellites, but there was a hypothesis that in the past the moon of Venus was Mercury, which was later "lost" by it.
Venus is the hottest planet in the Solar system. The surface temperature of Venus is approximately 464° C, although it receives only twice as much heat from the Sun as the Earth. The dense atmosphere of Venus is the main reason for this high temperature. The fact is that the shell of Venus is able to pass solar heat, but not release, so Venus is a large greenhouse, the atmosphere of which is almost entirely composed of carbon dioxide. The pressure at the surface is 90 times greater than earth's, which is why carbon dioxide at the surface turns into a liquid. The upper limit of the atmosphere is at an altitude of 350 kilometers. In 2011, the Venus Express spacecraft detected the ozone layer, which is located at an altitude of 100 kilometers. At an altitude of 65-70 kilometers, winds blow at a speed of 110 m/s, and strictly from East to West. Venusian clouds take four earth days to complete a full circle over the planet due to constantly blowing strong winds. Presumably, in the upper layers of the troposphere of Venus from time to time there are acid rains, but they never reach the surface of the planet due to rapid evaporation.
Thanks to the work of the stations of the "Venus" series, terrain maps were compiled. It turned out that a large number of volcanoes on Venus cause lava flows, as well as Venus tremors, but on Venus there are also vast plains intersected by mountain ranges, the largest of which are the Maxwell mountains, rising above the average level by 11 kilometers. The surface of Venus is relatively young: it is approximately 500 million years old. For large asteroids and comets, the dense atmosphere of Venus is not a barrier, so impact craters on the planet's surface are not uncommon. As on our planet, the crust is split into several separate plates, and the liquid iron core almost does not move, which is why the movement of charged particles is almost absent, so Venus's own magnetic field is very weak. The first landing of an unmanned spacecraft on Venus was made in 1970 by a Soviet probe, which accurately established that the Sun was not visible from the surface of Venus due to dense clouds. Despite the fact that there are no answers to many questions about this mysterious planet, thanks to the use of space technology, some of the secrets of Venus have been revealed to mankind.
EARTH
The main characteristics of the Earth:
1. Composition: 32% - iron, 30% - oxygen, 15% - silicon, 14% - magnesium, 3% - sulfur.
2. Diameter: 12756 km.
3. Weight: 5, 9726H1024 kg.
4. the period of rotation around the Sun: 365.26 days.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 23 hours 56 min and 4.1 s.
6. The acceleration of gravity: 9.8 m/CI (1g).
7. Distance from Sun: 149 597 871 km.

Despite the fact that the Earth can not boast of any record indicators in terms of mass or size, it has one unique feature — the presence of life, namely, the biosphere, the living shell of the Earth. Many people may think that people know almost everything about the Earth, but in reality, we can barely overcome the ten-kilometer limit, even with the deepest wells. But as in medicine, the Earth can be studied using x-rays. Strangely enough, the most appropriate time to study the internal structure of the Earth falls on earthquakes, because the speed of seismic waves depends on the density of the rocks through which they pass. Thus, it was during earthquakes that it was established that the Earth consists of three layers: the core, the mantle (shell) and the crust.
The earth's crust is the upper part of the solid Earth, whose thickness ranges from 6 to 70 kilometers. The earth's mantle is the secondary shell of the Earth, located between the earth's crust and the core. The mantle accounts for about 67% of The earth's mass, and its depth varies from 35 to 2900 kilometers. Because of the high temperature and ultrahigh pressure, almost all the mantle material is in a solid crystalline state, and only the asthenosphere, the flexible layer of the upper mantle, consists of semi-molten matter on which rigid lithospheric plates float. The existence of the earth's core became known only at the beginning of the XX century. In the core, there are current loops that resemble turns of wire in an electromagnet, which generate geomagnetic fields, and the temperature in the center of The earth's core reaches 6000 °C. The pressure in the core is 3.5 million times greater than on the surface of the Earth, and there is so much gold that it can cover the entire planet with a half-meter layer. Gold in the core appeared because of its density, because during the formation of the Earth, the planet was melting, which means that the metals behaved like liquids: the heaviest "sank", and the lighter ones "floated" to the surface.
According to our scientific theory, about 4.5 billion years ago, a cloud consisting of hydrogen and helium began to shrink, and when gravity flattened it into a protoplanetary disk perpendicular to its axis of rotation, large clumps of dust and gas began to form into the main elements of the solar system, one of which was our Earth. At the moment, the shape of the Earth resembles a flattened ellipsoid, so the Equatorial diameter is 43 kilometers larger than the polar one.
The earth's atmosphere approximately weighs 5, 15H1018 kilograms, which is less than a millionth of the planet's mass. Although oxygen is required to support life, its share in the atmosphere is about 21%, the remaining part is nitrogen, which is 78%, and various impurities of argon and carbon dioxide (less than 1%). But at an altitude of more than 600 kilometers, helium already prevails, and more than 2 thousand kilometers — hydrogen. Moreover, our Earth annually drops about 100 thousand tons due to hydrogen, which escapes into space, but at the same time adds weight to 40 thousand tons due to Stardust, which consists of oxygen, iron, Nickel and other elements and settles on the surface of the planet, which is literally covered with it, and every person inhales it.
The hydrosphere is probably the most unique and essentially primordial habitat in the Solar system. Water covers more than 70% of the earth's surface, and the mass of the hydrosphere is 275 times that of the atmosphere, with 94% of the world's ocean water, which contains 140 trillion tons of carbon dioxide in its layers. However, only 0.0003% of the water on Earth can be used by humans, and of this 0.0003%, about 68% is in Antarctica in the form of ice. All these figures definitely confirm the uniqueness of our planet in the Solar system.
As already noted, the Earth takes an average of 23 hours, 56 minutes and 4 seconds to make one revolution around its axis, and the speed of rotation of the Earth around its axis is quite high and is equal to 1670 km/h. However, this speed is not even close to the speed of the earth's rotation around the Sun, which is equal to 107 thousand km / h. At this speed, our planet can travel almost a billion kilometers in 365 days, 5 hours, and just under 49 minutes. But still, The earth's rotation is quite unstable, because due to the gravitational interaction with the Moon and the Sun, every next day is longer than the previous ones by an average of 29 nanoseconds.
Each planet, depending on its mass, has a so-called acceleration of the combined fall. At Earth, it is 9.81 m / si, but this is the average acceleration value, which varies depending on latitude. Many people mistakenly believe that the acceleration of gravity g, as well as the force with which the Earth attracts all objects, is directed to its center. In fact, the force with which the Earth attracts us to itself acts at a certain angle-depending on the latitude, and only at the equator can we say for sure that the force of gravity is directed strictly downward. Moreover, the gravity at The earth's poles differs from the gravity at the equator. For example, a plane with passengers at the North or South pole will weigh about 9 tons more than the same plane at the equator. In this case, the shape of the Earth plays an important role, because, as already mentioned, the Earth is an ellipsoid, flattened at the poles and stretched in the Equatorial zone.
The earth's magnetic field can be considered one of the main causes of life on our planet, because it forms the magnetosphere, which deflects particles of the solar wind. As already mentioned, the magnetic field occurs in the Central region of the Earth due to the flow of current in the liquid metal core. The magnetic poles periodically change their polarity, that is, the North and South poles change places, this is called an inversion of the magnetic field. The last inversion occurred about 700 thousand years ago.
The future of our planet can only be described with great uncertainty. If we ignore the possibility of space intervention and human activity, then eventually the bowels will cool down, which will lead to a halt in the movement of continents. Also, the future fate of the Earth will depend on the average annual temperature. For example, scientists assume that over the next billion years, due to the increase in the Sun by about 10%, the entire world's oceans will evaporate, which will lead to irreversible catastrophic consequences. Obviously, the life of humanity in our modern understanding of it is likely to be impossible.
MOON
Main characteristics of the Moon:
1. Composition: 43% - oxygen, 21% - silicon, 10% - aluminum, 9% - calcium, 9% - iron, 5% - magnesium.
2. Diameter: 3474 km.
3. Weight: 7, 3477H1022 kg.
4. The period of rotation around the Earth: 27.3 days.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 27.3 days.
6. Acceleration of gravity: 1.62 m / si (0.16 g).
7. Distance from Earth: 384,467 km.

The Moon is a celestial body, which was probably the only celestial object in respect of which no one had any doubt that it was moving around the Earth. According to official science, the Moon appeared a little later than the Earth, about 4.5 billion years ago. There are many hypotheses about the origin of the Moon, but the most popular is the hypothesis that the Moon formed after the collision of the Earth and Theia, a hypothetical planet that had a similar size to Mars. As a result, the resulting fragments under the influence of the mutual force of attraction of the fragments gradually began to form a satellite of the Earth. The Moon is not really a perfect ball, but rather has an egg-shaped shape due to the strong gravitational influence of the Earth. Since our natural satellite has a relatively large mass, due to the effect caused by the gravitational-tidal interaction between the satellite and the planet, the Moon gradually moves away from the Earth by 380 meters every 10 thousand years, and its orbit is not a circle or ellipse, but a slowly unwinding spiral.
Even with the naked eye, dark spots of various shapes can be seen on the moon's disk. In the Middle ages, it was believed that there was water on the Moon, so these spots were later called seas, and lighter areas — land. But already in 1753 Roger Boscovich, a Croatian astronomer, it has been proven that the Moon has virtually no atmosphere. This meant that there could be no liquid water on the moon. The rarefied atmosphere leads to a high temperature drop — from -173° C to +127° C, and because of the rarefied atmosphere, the sky on the moon is always black.
Lunar craters have been the cause of controversy for many years. Some scientists believed that the lunar craters were formed as a result of powerful volcanic eruptions on the surface, others were adherents of the meteorite theory, according to which for millions of years of bombing when a celestial body collides with the Moon, the satellite's surface was forced through and craters formed. In 1964, the Ranger spacecraft flew to the moon, and the data obtained from this device made it possible to conclude that the lunar craters appeared due to the bombardment of meteorites.
The density of the Moon is 3346 kg / mi — this means that our satellite either does not have a dense core, or it is very small. The thickness of the lunar crust is on average 50 kilometers. In the samples of sedimentary soil of the Moon, which is called regolith, the most common element is silicon dioxide, which makes up about 43% of the lunar regolith, also in 1978, after analyzing soil samples delivered by the probe "Luna-24", water was found. Most of the water, at least 600 million tons, is located in the North pole region in the form of ice.
The Moon has another amazing feature — its rotation period and rotation around the Sun are equal. Because of this position, which has been established over millions of years of satellite evolution, it seems to us that the Moon practically does not rotate and faces the Earth all the time with one side. For the first time, the reverse side of the moon was photographed by the Soviet Luna-3 station in 1959.
MARS
Main characteristics of Mars:
1. Composition: 47% - oxygen, 28% - silicon, 8% - aluminum, 5% - iron.
2. Diameter: 6794 km.
3. Weight: 6, 4171H1023 kg.
4. the period of rotation around the Sun: 686.98 days.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 24 hours 37 minutes.
6. Acceleration of free fall: 3,711 m/CI (0,37 g).
7. The distance from the Sun: 2 279 438 200 km.

Since ancient times, people have periodically observed a bright orange star in the sky. The Greeks and Romans dedicated all the planets to the gods, and for the God of war, Mars was not found more suitable. And when in 1877 Asaph Hall discovered two moons of Mars, he gave them the names Phobos and Deimos, which in Greek means "fear" and "horror", because it is fear and horror — the eternal companions of war.
Mars is the fourth planet farthest from the Sun. By mass, the planet is in the penultimate place among the planets of the Solar system. The orbit of Mars is very elongated relative to other planets, so the distance to the Sun varies from 206.6 to 249.2 million kilometers. If you look at the linear size of Mars, it is almost half the size of the Earth, the mass of Mars is about 10.7% of the mass of the Earth, and the surface area of Mars is approximately equal to the area of all the land on Earth. The axis of rotation of Mars is tilted relative to its orbit by 22°, which is only 1.5° less than the axis of rotation of the Earth. This tilt of the axis ensures the change of seasons.
The atmosphere of Mars is 95% carbon dioxide, and the remaining 5% is nitrogen, oxygen, argon, water vapor and other gases. The rarefied atmosphere creates pressure on the surface 160 times less than on Earth, but the thickness of the entire atmosphere is 110 kilometers. The rarefied Martian atmosphere is a great danger for astronauts who will land on the surface, since the level of ionizing radiation on Mars is significantly higher than on The earth's surface. Thus, in two days, an astronaut on the surface of Mars will receive the same radiation dose as he would have received on the surface of the Earth in a year. Because of the Martian atmosphere, the sky at the Zenith is reddish-pink, and the sunrises and sunsets are blue and purple. The temperature on the planet ranges from -153° C at the poles in winter and up to +20° C in summer.
Studying meteorites of Martian origin found in Antarctica, scientists found that about 4 billion years ago, the temperature on Mars was 18 ± 4° C, and the atmosphere was dense enough for the climate to be humid, there was liquid water, and it rained. On Mars, with the onset of spring, the polar caps begin to melt, which leads to a sharp movement of large masses of gas, while the speed of the blowing winds can reach 100 m/s. Formed dust storms almost completely cover the surface of the planet.
At first glance, the surface of Mars resembles that of the Moon, but the terrain of the planet is much more varied. The southern hemisphere is several kilometers above average and is dotted with many craters. Most of the Northern hemisphere is below average, with almost no craters, and the main part is occupied by smooth plains. Mars has the highest mountain in the Solar system — Olympus, which reaches 27 kilometers in height relative to its base, and the volume of Olympus is almost ten times the volume of the largest terrestrial volcano, Mauna Kea in the Hawaiian Islands. The largest Martian upland is the Mariner valley. It stretches in the latitudinal direction for almost a quarter of the circumference of the planet — almost 4 thousand kilometers.
The Mariner valley is the largest canyon in the Solar system, which is equal to the area of the United States. Looking at images of Mars, you can see dried-up riverbeds. On the slopes of hills, you can also find dark stripes that indicate the appearance of salt water. Spectral analysis has shown that it is the salts that are able to ensure the existence of liquid water on Mars.
Red is probably the main distinguishing feature of Mars. It is the iron oxide that is found in the soil that gives it such a reddish color. If you look at the internal structure of Mars and Earth, you can definitely say that the nuclei of planets are proportional to their size, and by studying the magnetic field, scientists have found that in the past on Mars, as well as on Earth, there was a movement of lithospheric plates. Besides Earth, Mars is the only planet that has polar caps.
As already mentioned, Mars has two natural satellites — Phobos and Deimos. Their origin is not fully known, but scientists suggest that they are asteroids that were captured by the gravitational field of Mars. Both moons are ellipsoid-shaped and rotate around their axes with the same period as around Mars, so they are always turned to the planet with the same side. However, the gravitational forces of Mars gradually slow down the movement of Phobos, which will eventually lead to its fall to Mars, while Deimos, on the contrary, gradually moves away from Mars.
The existence of life on Mars is probably one of the most discussed topics in science fiction. However, there are reasonable hypotheses in science that there could have been a planet on Mars. For example, the NASA Mars Rover Curiosity found organic molecules in rock samples and a relatively high content of methane in the atmosphere, and the Martian soil is ideal for growing asparagus and turnips, it has all the nutrients necessary to support life. But if we consider the current conditions of life on Mars, none of the people or animals would have survived on Mars without special equipment, because the pressure on Mars is so low that the oxygen in the blood instantly turns into gas bubbles, which leads to instant death. Also, due to the lack of an ozone layer, the planet receives lethal doses of radiation at sunrise. Of all the spacecraft that were launched to Mars, two-thirds disappeared without a trace. Scientists have suggested that there are zones on the planet where conventional navigation methods do not work and which are swallowed up by space satellites.
JUPITER
Main characteristics of Jupiter:
1. Composition: 89.5% of hydrogen, 10% helium, 0.3 percent methane.
2. Diameter: 142,800 km.
3. Weight: 1, 8986CH1027 kg.
4. The period of rotation around the Sun: 11.86 years.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 9 hours 55 min. 29 p.
6. Acceleration of gravity: 24.79 m / s (2.53 g).
7. Distance from the Sun: 778 547 200 km.

Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar system, the fifth most distant and the second most luminous. The ancient Greeks gave this planet the name of the Supreme God Zeus, and in the Roman Pantheon it corresponded to Jupiter. The planet has been known to people since ancient times and has occupied an important place in the religious beliefs of various cultures. Jupiter was the first planet to have satellites discovered. In 1610 Galileo discovered four satellites: IO, Europa, Calisto, and Ganymede. The rapid and highly visible movement of the Galilean satellites helped for a long time to use them to determine the position of the ship at sea. It was with the help of Jupiter that OLE Roemer was able to determine the speed of light in 1675. Finding that observations and calculations diverge, and satellite eclipses are delayed by about 1000 seconds, Roemer divided the diameter of the earth's orbit (300 million kilometers) by 1000 seconds and obtained that the speed of light is approximately 300,000 km/s, which is determined very close to the actual value of the speed of light.
Jupiter contains more than 2/3 of the mass of our entire planetary system and is 318 times heavier than Earth. But still, the only planet that affects the orbit and tilt of the orbit is Saturn.
If the mass of Jupiter exceeded its real mass by four times, the density of the planet would increase to such an extent that under the influence of gravitational forces, Jupiter would begin to shrink and eventually turn into a star, which is why many astronomers call Jupiter a failed star. As already mentioned, Jupiter rotates around its axis in 9 hours 55 minutes 29 seconds, which, in comparison with the size of the planet, makes it the record holder for the speed of rotation among all the planets in the Solar system, because of this, the planet is compressed.
Like a real gas planet, the main components in the atmosphere of Jupiter are helium and hydrogen, which make up 99%. In the highest clouds, the temperature reaches -145° C, but at a depth of 145 kilometers, the temperature is 153° C. The closer to the center, the stronger the pressure becomes, so that the gas turns into a liquid, and the temperature reaches 6000° C. However, the possibilities of pressure do not end there — on Jupiter, when the pressure reaches more than a million earth's atmosphere, metallic hydrogen is formed, and protons and electrons in this state of hydrogen exist separately. The greatest pressure is experienced by the core of the planet, where the temperature reaches 30,000° C. Presumably, because of the high pressure inside the core, processes of radioactive decay can occur, because Jupiter radiates twice as much energy into space as it absorbs.
On Jupiter, you can observe a lot of atmospheric phenomena. For example, in the deeper layers of the atmosphere, helium condensation occurs, which is the cause of helium showers. Convective flows carry internal heat to the surface and manifest as light zones and dark belts, at the borders of which various vortex structures are formed. The most famous such formation is the Great red spot, which has existed for at least 300 years.
The magnetic field of Jupiter is mainly formed by metallic helium, which is a conductor of currents. Because of the huge amount of energy released by Jupiter, when approaching this planet, the Galileo spacecraft received a radiation dose 25 times higher than the lethal dose for humans; also, because of the powerful flow of charged particles on Jupiter, you can observe constant auroras.
At the moment, Jupiter has 79 known satellites, the most interesting of which is Europa. Europe has a global ocean in which the presence of life is not excluded, and the surface is dotted with faults and cracks that have appeared in the icy shell of the satellite, and the oxygen content in the ocean is sufficient for the existence of quite complex forms of life.
The IO satellite is the most volcanically active body in the Solar system. Photos taken by space probes show that the surface of IO has a bright yellow color, which is already a very rare phenomenon at this distance from the star, especially for a satellite. Interestingly, there is a group of satellites that orbit the planet in the opposite direction. This phenomenon is probably recognized by the fact that they were captured later by the gravitational field of Jupiter. Jupiter also has temporary satellites that stay in its gravitational field for a certain period, make several turns, and leave the orbit.
As with Saturn, very faint rings can be observed in the orbit of Jupiter, the formation of which probably occurred due to the incessant volcanic activity of the satellites.
At the moment, large-scale studies of Jupiter and its satellites are being carried out using ground-based and space vehicles, and the NASA Galileo spacecraft has even visited the orbit of Jupiter. In 2022 The European space Agency is planning to launch JUICE, an interplanetary station to Jupiter that will arrive in orbit in 2030 and study the planet and satellites for three years.
SATURN
The main characteristics of Saturn:
1. Composition: 93% - hydrogen, 6% - helium, 1% - methane, ammonia.
2. Diameter: 120 000 km.
3. Weight: 5.6846×1026 kg.
4. The period of rotation around the Sun: 29.46 years.
5. Rotation Period around its axis: 10 h. 40 min. 30 s. 6. acceleration of gravity: 10.44 m/S2 (1.1 g).
7. Distance from the Sun: 1,429,394,069 km.

Saturn is the sixth-most distant planet from the Sun and the second-largest in the Solar system. Saturn is part of a group of giant planets. This planet is named after the Roman God of agriculture. Even a medium-strength telescope can clearly see that Saturn is very flattened, and of all the planets in the Solar system, Saturn has the greatest compression. Despite the fact that the mass of Saturn is 95 times the mass of the Earth, the acceleration of gravity at the equator is 10.44 m/si, which is approximately equal to the earth's mass. Saturn is the only planet that has an axial rotation speed at the equator greater than the orbital rotation speed.
The planet's atmosphere consists of 96% hydrogen, and the remaining 4% is made up of helium, methane, and ammonia. Along the equator of the planet passes a huge atmospheric current, the speed of which reaches 500 m/s. The average temperature is -185° C. On the planet were discovered auroras, the likes of which have not been observed yet in the Solar system, because they were bright continuous elongated rings.
Saturn is the only planet that has regular polygonal shapes. So, the clouds at the North pole of Saturn form a giant regular hexagon, each side of which is approximately 13.8 thousand kilometers, and inside it can fit four Earths. The rotation period of this hexagon coincides with the rotation period of the inner part of Saturn, which allows you to maintain the shape during rotation. There is no complete explanation for this phenomenon yet.
Below the atmosphere stretches an ocean of liquid molecular hydrogen, and already at a depth of half the radius of the planet, the pressure reaches 3 million earth atmospheres and leads to the formation of metallic hydrogen. In the center of the planet is a massive core (its temperature is 11,700° C), which in addition to the rod can be ice. This ice is different from earth's ice, has a different crystal lattice and can withstand huge temperatures. Saturn emits 2.5 times more energy than it receives from the Sun. Scientists cannot fully explain this phenomenon, because there can be no thermonuclear reactions inside the planet.
Saturn can be seen with the naked eye from Earth. Galileo Galilei was the first to observe Saturn through a telescope. And in 1659, Huygens found out that Saturn has a thin flat ring encircling the planet. All the gas giants in the Solar system have rings, but Saturn has the best view of them. There are four main rings in total, but if you look at the images taken by the probe in more detail, you can see that the rings are formed from thousands of thin rings. Saturn's rings are so thin that with a diameter of 250 thousand kilometers, their thickness is about 10-20 meters. These rings consist of 93% ice and 7% carbon and are snowballs that move around Saturn at a speed of 10 km/s. Surprisingly, Saturn has herding moons that are responsible for keeping the rings in their places. However, the origin of the rings of Saturn is not yet completely clear, and various hypotheses can not fully explain many questions that arise from scientists.
Saturn has 82 moons. The largest satellites are Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, dione, Rhea, and Titan. Titan is the largest satellite and weighs 20 times more than all the others. The uniqueness of Titan is that It has an atmosphere with clouds, and is also the only body in the Solar system other than Earth for which the existence of a liquid on the surface has been proven.
URANUS
Main characteristics of Uranus:
1. Composition: 83% - hydrogen, 15% - helium, 2.3% - methane ice.
2. Diameter: 51,800 km.
3. Weight: 8, 6813H1025 kg.
4. The period of rotation around the Sun: 84.01 years.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 17 hours 14 min.
6. The acceleration of gravity: 8.87 m/CI (0,89 g).
7. The distance from the Sun: 2 082 876 679 km.

Until the XVIII century. the boundary of the Solar system was considered to be Saturn, and few people could believe that in 1781, an ordinary music teacher from great Britain, William Herschel, discovered the seventh most remote planet of the Solar system. Naturally, like all planets, Uranus was named after the Greek God of the sky. Uranus was the first planet discovered using a telescope. Uranus, like Neptune, is a large ice giant.
The plane of Uranus ' equator is inclined to the plane of Its orbit at almost a right angle (97.86°) — that is, the planet rotates "lying on its side slightly upside down". This abnormal rotation is explained by a strong collision of Uranus with a large celestial body at an early stage of formation. But despite the fact that the Equatorial regions receive many times less energy from the Sun, the Equatorial regions are much warmer than the polar ones. With a clear dark sky in rural areas, Uranus in opposition is visible to the naked eye from Earth, and large telescopes with a lens diameter of 30 centimeters or more can distinguish clouds and see large satellites. In the entire Solar system, only Uranus and Venus rotate on their axis from East to West. Uranus is so far away that it takes about three hours for sunlight to reach Uranus.
When we speak of the Earth as a "blue planet", we do not exaggerate its blueness, because the really blue planet turned out to be distant Uranus. Because of the atmosphere of Uranus in the upper layers of which there is methane that absorbs red rays and reflects blue ones. The stone core is very small compared to the ice shell and the hydrogen-helium atmosphere. However, this structure is practically not proven, and there is more than one hypothesis about the internal structure of Uranium. This inaccuracy in research is due to the fact that the average distance from Uranus to Earth is 2.8 billion kilometers. However, measurements of the planet's temperature have shown that Uranus is the coldest planet in the Solar system, with the lowest recorded temperature being -224° C. Uranus receives 400 times less light from the Sun than Earth. Also, of all the giant planets in our system, only Uranus emits less heat than it receives from the Sun.
Uranus has a weak ring system that was discovered only in 1977. This system of 13 rings is divided into two groups: light and black. The former consist of a certain type of snow, the latter of various rock formations.
Uranus has almost the same strong magnetic field as the Earth, but its specificity is that it is not directed from the geometric center of the planet and is tilted 60 degrees relative to the axis of rotation.
At the moment, Uranus has 27 natural satellites, the largest of which are Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania and Oberon. The names of satellites were first assigned not in honor of the Greco-Roman deities, but in honor of the characters of the Comedy by William Shakespeare. Uranus ' moons are mostly made up of ice and rocks, with some of them having various forms of terrain and huge canyons up to 20 kilometers deep. Uranus is the least studied planet in the Solar system, but this fact only fuels interest in it.
NEPTUNE
The main characteristics of Neptune:
1. Composition: 80% - hydrogen, 15% - helium, 5% - methane and other gases.
2. Diameter: 48,600 km.
3. Weight: 1, 0243ch1026kg.
4. The period of rotation around the Sun: 164.79 years.
5. Period of rotation around its axis: 16 hours 3 min.
6. Acceleration of free fall: 11,15 m/CI (1,14 g).
7. The distance from the Sun: 4 503 443 661 km.

Neptune is probably the first celestial body that was first discovered theoretically, and then discovered in the sky in the predicted place. Thus, in 1846, Urbain Leverrier discovered Neptune based on the astronomical predictions of Adams. Neptune is the farthest planet from Earth in the Solar system, the third by mass and the fourth by volume.
Neptune is named after the Roman God of the seas, and its astronomical symbol represents the Trident of Neptune. Of course, at such great distances, the study of planets is not an easy task. Even such basics as the average distance from the Sun, inclination of equator to orbital plane and many others were inaccurate in the second half of the XX century differed from today's.
Neptune is a gas giant with 17 times the mass of the Earth. Like Uranus, Neptune is an "ice giant". Neptune has a significant influence on the Kuiper belt, which is a huge area of the Solar system from the orbit of Neptune to the almost so-called borders of the Solar system.
As already mentioned, Neptune is very similar to Uranus, so scientists assume that the planet has an atmosphere consisting of hydrogen, helium and methane; a mantle consisting of water and methane ice and a rock-ice core. The weather on Neptune is characterized by an extremely dynamic system of storms with winds that reach supersonic speeds, with most of the winds on Neptune blowing in the opposite direction to the rotation of the planet, and a sustained supersonic storm like the Great dark spot is comparable to the size of the Earth.
The average temperature of the planet is approximately -200 °C. Despite the fact that Neptune is one and a half times farther from the Sun than Uranus and receives a thousand times less sunlight than Earth, the surface temperatures of Uranus and Neptune are approximately equal, with Neptune radiating 2.5 times more heat than it receives.
At the moment, Neptune has 14 known satellites, the largest of which, Triton, belongs to more than 99.5% of their total mass. This satellite is amazing because it moves in a direction opposite to the rotation of the planet itself. Due to the fact that Triton is closest to Neptune, and its rotation period is only six days, we can conclude that Triton will eventually be destroyed by the gravitational forces of Neptune, and as a result of such a powerful destruction, Neptune will probably form rings that may be more powerful than the rings of Saturn. Despite the fact that in 1989 Triton has recorded the lowest temperature among objects in the Solar system that have geological activity, Triton is one of three satellites in the Solar system that has an atmosphere. Also, scientists do not exclude the existence of a liquid ocean under the ice crown.
Neptune, like all the planets of the giant group, is not deprived of rings, but they are much smaller than the rings of Saturn and presumably consist of ice particles and carbon formations.
PLUTO
Having considered our main star and the planets that surround it, we can not say anything about the dwarf planet Pluto, which until 2006 was considered the ninth planet of the Solar system.
Pluto is the largest of the five recognized dwarf planets in the Solar system. American astronomer Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, looking at images at the Observatory, discovered Pluto, for which he was later awarded the medal of the Royal astronomical society of London.
The planet was named after the Greek God of the underworld. Due to the fact that Pluto's orbit is not a circle, but rather an ellipse, periodically Pluto is closer to the Sun than Neptune. Pluto has an atmosphere, although sparse, consisting of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane, and can freeze completely and disappear when Pluto moves very far away from the Sun. Since the discovery of Pluto, only one season has changed there — now it is spring. This is due to the length of the year, which is almost 248 earth years. Pluto has five moons, the largest of which, Charon, has only half the mass of Pluto. Studying satellites, as well as the dwarf planet itself, is not an easy task, because Pluto is poorly distinguishable even in the Hubble space telescope. However, scientists do not deny the possibility of a subglacial ocean of "wild" water.
ASTEROID BELT
The word "asteroid "is translated from ancient Greek as"like a star". It is impossible to see an asteroid with the naked eye from the Earth's surface, but they immediately attract attention when entering the atmosphere. Shooting stars are precisely small asteroids that burn up in the atmosphere. In the Solar system, there is indeed a certain region located between Mars and Jupiter, which is the site of a cluster of many asteroids and minor planets. Despite the fact that the belt occupies an impressive part of space, its total mass is only 4% of the mass of the moon. Asteroids are counted in millions, but only a few large objects in the belt can be identified.
Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt and the smallest of the dwarf planets. Ceres is almost a thousand kilometers in diameter, larger than many satellites, and contains a third of the total mass of the asteroid belt. The formation of the belt is directly affected by the massive Jupiter, its gravitational field leads to more severe collisions of bodies with each other and their enlargement. For mankind, the study of asteroids is of great interest not only from the point of view of science, but also from the point of view of the space industry and industrial development of asteroids, because they consist mainly of carbon, silicon and iron.
Speaking of astroids, we can not say meteorites and meteors, although in fact meteors, meteorites and asteroids are the same objects, the difference is only in the described situation. For example, if an asteroid wanders through space, it can enter the atmosphere of a planet, and then it can be called a meteor. Most meteors burn up before reaching the surface, but those that do reach the surface of the planet are called meteorites.
KUIPER BELT
The Kuiper belt is another area of the asteroid cluster that lies beyond the orbit of Neptune. The Kuiper belt is 20 times wider and 200 times more massive than the asteroid belt. This belt consists of methane, ammonia, and water, and it also contains four of the five dwarf planets in the Solar system (Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris). The belt was only discovered three decades ago.
COMETS
A comet is a relatively small celestial body that orbits the Sun in a very elongated orbit. The comet consists of water, dust and rocks; the largest comets can reach 50 kilometers in diameter. When approaching the Sun, the comet forms clouds of dust gases that surround it, and later become a tail. For example, the length of the tail of the comet Hyakutake is was about 580 million kilometers. In a clear night sky, the tail of a comet can be observed for several days, and when the comet flies very close to the Earth, it can be seen even during the day.
Currently, about 6-7 thousand comets have been detected, but in the Oort cloud surrounding our system, the region of the Solar system that serves as the source of comets, there may be about a trillion of them, but it is still not known exactly where comets come from. The only comet that is visible to the naked eye is Halley's comet. So, the first mention of this comet is recorded in 240 BC in the Chinese Chronicles.



1) https://top10a.ru/samye-izvestnye-sozvezdiya.html#1 
2) http://www.russianspaceweb.com  
3) http://www.astronet.ru/
4) http://www.college.ru/astronomy/  
5) http://www.nasa.gov  
6) П.А.Бакулин, Э.В.Кононович, В.И.Мороз. Курс общей астрономии (4-е издание).7) Пантелеев В. Л. Физика Земли и планет. 4) Данлоп С. Азбука звездного неба. 5) Майлс Л., Смит А. Астрономия и космос. 6) Гусев И. Е., Астрономия. 8)Болсун А. И., Рапанович Е. Н. Словарь физических и астрономических терминов. 9) Кошевар Д. В. Вселенная и космос. )






